Third Crusade By Wikipedia Contributors|Sep. 2nd, 2019

Send to Kindle

This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain
unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to
improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June
2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Richard-Coeur-de-Lion-on-his-way-to-Jerusalem.JPGThe Third CrusadePart
of the Crusades Richard the Lionheart marches towards Jerusalem. James
William Glass (1850). Belligerents Crusaders:

Kingdom of England and Angevin Empire Kingdom of France Burgundy Blois
Champagne Flanders Brittany Holy Roman Empire Swabia Genoa Pisa
Austria Bohemia Brandenburg Montferrat Thuringia Baden Holland
Holstein Kingdom of Hungary Levantine Crusader states:

Kingdom of Jerusalem County of Tripoli Principality of Antioch
Crusading orders:

Knights Templar Knights Hospitaller Teutonic Order Order of the Holy
Sepulchre Order of Saint Lazarus Knights of Saint Thomas Eastern
Christian allies:

Kingdom of Cilicia Muslim forces:

Ayyubid Sultanate Egypt Damascus Hamah Mesopotamia Sultanate of Rûm
Nizari Ismaili state in Syria (the Assassins) Eastern Christian
opponents:

Byzantine Empire Empire of Cyprus Commanders and leaders Crusaders:

Richard I 1st seal.png Richard I of England Philip II of France Hugh
III of Burgundy † Theobald V of Blois † Henry II of Champagne Philip I
of Flanders † Frederick I Barbarossa † Frederick VI of Swabia †
Leopold V of Austria Conrad of Montferrat Děpolt of Bohemia † Markward
von Annweiler Albert II of Brandenburg Prince Géza of Hungary
Margaritus of Brindisi Levantine Crusader states:

Guy I of Jerusalem Humphrey IV of Toron Balian of Ibelin Raymond III
of Tripoli Joscelin III of Edessa † Crusading orders:

Grand Master Robert de Sablé Grand Master Garnier de Nablus Master
Sibrand Eastern Christian allies:

Leo I of Armenia Muslim forces:

Saladin Taqi ad-Din Saphadin Al-Afdal Gökböri Kilij Arslan II Rashid
ad-Din Sinan Eastern Christian opponents:

Isaac II Angelos Isaac Komnenos of Cyprus Strength 36,000-73,000
troops in total (estimate)

8,000-9,000 English/Normans/Welsh troops with Richard I,[1] up to
17,000 including non-combatants and sailors[2] 7,000+ French with
Phillip II (inc. 650 knights and 1,300 squires)[1] 12,000–15,000
Germans with Frederick I (inc. 3-4,000 knights)[3] 2,000 Hungarians
with Geza[4] From 7,000[5] to 40,000[6] from the rest of Europe and
Outremer Ayyubids: 40,000 (Saladin's field army, 1189 - estimate)[7]
5,000-20,000 (Acre's garrison, 1189)[8][9] Seljuks: 22,000+ (Qutb
al-Din's field army only, 1190)[10][11] The Third Crusade (1189–1192)
was an attempt by the leaders of the three most powerful states of
Western Christianity (England, France, and the Holy Roman Empire) to
reconquer the Holy Land following the capture of Jerusalem by the
Ayyubid sultan, Saladin, in 1187. It was partially successful,
recapturing the important cities of Acre and Jaffa, and reversing most
of Saladin's conquests, but it failed to recapture Jerusalem, which
was the major aim of the Crusade and its religious focus.

After the failure of the Second Crusade of 1147-1149, the Zengid
dynasty controlled a unified Syria and engaged in a conflict with the
Fatimid rulers of Egypt. Saladin ultimately brought both the Egyptian
and Syrian forces under his own control, and employed them to reduce
the Crusader states and to recapture Jerusalem in 1187. Spurred by
religious zeal, King Henry II of England and King Philip II of France
(known as "Philip Augustus") ended their conflict with each other to
lead a new crusade. The death of Henry (6 July 1189), however, meant
the English contingent came under the command of his successor, King
Richard I of England. The elderly German Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
also responded to the call to arms, leading a massive army across
Anatolia, but he drowned in a river in Asia Minor on 10 June 1190
before reaching the Holy Land. His death caused tremendous grief among
the German Crusaders, and most of his troops returned home.

After the Crusaders had driven the Muslims from Acre, Philip—in
company with Frederick's successor in command of the German crusaders,
Leopold V, Duke of Austria (known as Leopold the Virtuous)—left the
Holy Land in August 1191. On 2 September 1192 Richard and Saladin
finalized the Treaty of Jaffa, which granted Muslim control over
Jerusalem but allowed unarmed Christian pilgrims and merchants to
visit the city. Richard departed the Holy Land on 9 October 1192. The
successes of the Third Crusade allowed Westerners to maintain
considerable states in Cyprus and on the Syrian coast.

The failure to re-capture Jerusalem inspired the subsequent Fourth
Crusade of 1202–1204, but Europeans would only regain the city—and
only briefly—in the Sixth Crusade in 1229.

Background Muslim unification After the failure of the Second Crusade,
Nur ad-Din Zangi had control of Damascus and a unified Syria. Eager to
expand his power, Nur ad-Din set his sights on the Fatimid dynasty of
Egypt. In 1163, Nur ad-Din sent his most trusted general, Shirkuh, on
a military expedition to the Nile. Accompanying the general was his
young nephew, Saladin. With Shirkuh's troops camped outside of Cairo,
Egypt's sultan Shawar called on King Amalric I of Jerusalem for
assistance. In response, Amalric sent an army into Egypt and attacked
Shirkuh's troops at Bilbeis in 1164.

In an attempt to divert Crusader attention from Egypt, Nur ad-Din
attacked Antioch, resulting in a massacre of Christian soldiers and
the capture of several Crusader leaders, including Bohemond III,
Prince of Antioch. Nur ad-Din sent the scalps of the Christian
defenders to Egypt for Shirkuh to proudly display at Bilbeis for
Amalric's soldiers to see. This action prompted both Amalric and
Shirkuh to lead their armies out of Egypt.

In 1167, Nur ad-Din again sent Shirkuh to conquer the Fatimids in
Egypt. Shawar again opted to call upon Amalric to defend his
territory. The combined Egyptian-Christian forces pursued Shirkuh
until he retreated to Alexandria. Amalric then breached his alliance
with Shawar by turning his forces on Egypt and besieging the city of
Bilbeis. Shawar pleaded with his former enemy, Nur ad-Din, to save him
from Amalric's treachery. Lacking the resources to maintain a
prolonged siege of Cairo against the combined forces of Nur ad-Din and
Shawar, Amalric retreated. This new alliance gave Nur ad-Din rule over
virtually all of Syria and Egypt.

Saladin's conquests Shawar was executed for his alliances with the
Christian forces, and Shirkuh succeeded him as vizier of Egypt. In
1169, Shirkuh died unexpectedly after only weeks of rule. Shirkuh's
successor was his nephew, Salah ad-Din Yusuf, commonly known as
Saladin. Nur ad-Din died in 1174, leaving the new empire to his
11-year-old son, As-Salih. It was decided that the only man competent
enough to uphold the jihad against the Franks was Saladin, who became
sultan of Egypt and Syria and the founder of the Ayyubid dynasty.

Amalric also died in 1174, leaving Jerusalem to his 13-year-old son,
Baldwin IV. Although Baldwin suffered from leprosy, he was an
effective and active military commander, defeating Saladin at the
battle of Montgisard in 1177, with support from Raynald of Châtillon,
who had been released from prison in 1176. Raynald later forged an
agreement with Saladin to allow free trade between Muslim and
Christian territories. He also raided caravans throughout the region
and expanded his piracy to the Red Sea by sending galleys to raid
ships, and to assault the city of Mecca itself. These acts enraged the
Muslim world, giving Raynald a reputation as the most hated man in the
Middle East.

Baldwin IV died in 1185, and the kingdom was left to his nephew
Baldwin V, whom he had crowned as co-king in 1183. Raymond III of
Tripoli again served as regent. The following year, Baldwin V died
before his ninth birthday, and his mother Princess Sybilla, sister of
Baldwin IV, crowned herself queen and her husband, Guy of Lusignan,
king. Raynald again raided a rich caravan and had its travelers thrown
in prison. Saladin demanded that the prisoners and their cargo be
released. The newly crowned King Guy appealed to Raynald to give in to
Saladin's demands, but Raynald refused to follow the king's orders.

Siege of the Kingdom of Jerusalem Full article: Battle of Hattin;
Siege of Jerusalem

Saladin's troops, French manuscript, 1337 This final act of outrage by
Raynald gave Saladin the opportunity he needed to take the offensive
against the kingdom, and in 1187 he laid siege to the city of
Tiberias. Raymond advised patience, but King Guy, acting on advice
from Raynald, marched his army to the Horns of Hattin outside of
Tiberias. The Frankish army, thirsty and demoralized, was destroyed in
the ensuing battle, and the city would not be held again by Christians
until 1229.[12]

King Guy and Raynald were brought to Saladin's tent, where Guy was
offered a goblet of water because of his great thirst. Guy took a
drink and then passed the goblet to Raynald. Raynald's having received
the goblet from King Guy rather than Saladin meant that Saladin would
not be forced to offer protection to the treacherous Raynald (it was
custom that if you were personally offered a drink by the host, your
life was safe). When Raynald accepted the drink from King Guy's hands,
Saladin told his interpreter, "say to the King: 'it is you who have
given him to drink'".[13] Afterwards, Saladin beheaded Raynald for
past betrayals. Saladin honored tradition with King Guy, who was sent
to Damascus and eventually ransomed to his people, one of the few
captive Crusaders to avoid execution.

By the end of the year, Saladin had taken Acre and Jerusalem. Pope
Urban III is said to have collapsed and died upon hearing the news of
the battle of Hattin.[14]

Preparations The new pope, Gregory VIII, proclaimed that the capture
of Jerusalem was punishment for the sins of Christians across Europe.
The cry went up for a new crusade to the Holy Land. Henry II of
England and Philip II of France ended their war with each other, and
both imposed a "Saladin tithe" on their citizens to finance the
venture. In Britain, Baldwin of Exeter, the archbishop of Canterbury,
made a tour through Wales, convincing 3,000 men-at-arms to take up the
cross, recorded in the Itinerary of Giraldus Cambrensis.

Barbarossa's crusade

"Death of Frederick of Germany" by Gustave Doré The elderly Holy Roman
Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa responded to the call immediately. He
took up the Cross at Mainz Cathedral on 27 March 1188 and was the
first to set out for the Holy Land on 11 May 1189 with an army of
12,000–15,000 men, including 4,000 knights.[3][15] Contemporary
chroniclers gave a range estimates for Frederick's army, from 10,000
to 600,000 men, including 4,000–20,000 knights.[3][16][17][18] A
contingent of 2,000 men led by the Hungarian prince Géza, the younger
brother of the king Béla III of Hungary, and Bishop Ugrin Csák also
went with Barbarossa to the Holy Land.[19]

The Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelos attempted to forge a secret
alliance with Saladin to impede Frederick's progress in exchange for
his empire's safety, which failed.[20] The Germans were delayed for
six months in Thrace as the Byzantines refused to let them cross.
After reaching Anatolia, Frederick was promised safe passage through
the region by the Turkish Sultanate of Rum, but was faced instead with
constant Turkish hit-and-run attacks on his army.[21] A Turkish army
of 10,000 men was destroyed at the Battle of Philomelion by 2,000
Crusaders, with 4,174–5,000 Turks slain.[22] After continued Turkish
raids against the Crusader army, Frederick decided to replenish his
stock of animals and foodstuffs by conquering the Turkish capital of
Iconium. On 18 May 1190, the German army crushed its Turkish enemies
at the Battle of Iconium, sacking the city and killing 3,000 Turkish
troops.[23]

While crossing the Saleph River on 10 June 1190, Frederick's horse
slipped, throwing him against the rocks; he then drowned in the river.
After this, much of his army returned to Germany by sea in
anticipation of the upcoming Imperial election. The Emperor's son,
Frederick of Swabia, led the remaining 5,000 men to Antioch. There,
the Emperor's body was boiled to remove the flesh, which was interred
in the Church of St. Peter; his bones were put in a bag to continue
the crusade. In Antioch, however, the German army was further reduced
by fever.[24] Young Frederick had to ask the assistance of his kinsman
Conrad of Montferrat to lead him safely to Acre, by way of Tyre, where
his father's bones were buried. While the Imperial army did not
achieve its objective of capturing Jerusalem, it did capture the
capital of the Seljuk Sultunate and had inflicted considerable damage
on Turkish forces, with more than 9,000 Turkish soldiers killed in all
battles and skirmishes combined.[25]

The early departure of the bulk of the German army after Frederick's
death inspired his son, Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, seven years
later to sponsor the German Crusade of 1197.

King Richard and King Philip's departure King Henry II of England died
on 6 July 1189 after a surprise attack by his son Richard the
Lionheart and King Philip II. Richard inherited the crown and
immediately began raising funds for the crusade. In the meantime, some
of his subjects departed in multiple waves by sea. Some of them
together with contingents from the Holy Roman Empire and France
conquered the Moorish city of Silves in Iberia during the summer of
1189, before continuing to the Holy Land. In April 1190, King
Richard's fleet departed from Dartmouth under the command of Richard
de Camville and Robert de Sablé on their way to meet their king in
Marseille. Parts of this fleet helped the Portuguese monarch Sancho I
defeat an Almohad counterattack against Santarém and Torres Novas,
while another group ransacked Christian Lisbon, only to be routed by
the Portuguese monarch.[26] Richard and Philip II met in France at
Vézelay and set out together on 4 July 1190 as far as Lyon where they
parted after agreeing to meet in Sicily; Richard with his retinue,
said to number 800, marched to Marseille and Philip to Genoa.[27]
Richard arrived in Marseille and found that his fleet had not arrived;
he quickly tired of waiting for them and hiring ships, left for Sicily
on 7 August, visiting several places in Italy en route and arrived in
Messina on 23 September. Meanwhile, the English fleet eventually
arrived in Marseille on 22 August, and finding that Richard had gone,
sailed directly to Messina, arriving before him on 14 September.[28]
Philip had hired a Genoese fleet to transport his army, which
consisted of 650 knights, 1,300 horses, and 1,300 squires to the Holy
Land by way of Sicily.[18]


Philip II depicted arriving in Palestine, 1332–1350 William II of
Sicily had died the previous year, and was replaced by Tancred, who
imprisoned Joan of England—William's wife and King Richard's sister.
Richard captured the city of Messina on 4 October 1190 and Joan was
released. Richard and Philip fell out over the issue of Richard's
marriage, as Richard had decided to marry Berengaria of Navarre,
breaking off his long-standing betrothal to Philip's half-sister Alys.
Philip left Sicily directly for the Middle East on 30 March 1191 and
arrived in Tyre in mid-May; he joined the siege of Acre on 20 May.
Richard did not set off from Sicily until 10 April.

Shortly after setting sail from Sicily, King Richard's armada of 180
ships and 39 galleys was struck by a violent storm.[29] Several ships
ran aground, including one holding Joan, his new fiancée Berengaria
and a large amount of treasure that had been amassed for the crusade.
It was soon discovered that Isaac Dukas Comnenus of Cyprus had seized
the treasure. The young women were unharmed. Richard entered Limassol
on 6 May and met with Isaac, who agreed to return Richard's belongings
and to send 500 of his soldiers to the Holy Land. Richard made camp at
Limassol, where he received a visit from Guy of Lusignan, the King of
Jerusalem, and married Berengaria, who was crowned queen. Once back at
his fortress of Famagusta, Isaac broke his oath of hospitality and
began issuing orders for Richard to leave the island. Isaac's
arrogance prompted Richard to conquer the island within days, finally
leaving on 5 June 1191.[30]

Siege of Acre Full article: Siege of Acre

The Third Crusade (1189-1192) Saladin released King Guy from prison in
1189. Guy attempted to take command of the Christian forces at Tyre,
but Conrad of Montferrat held power there after his successful defence
of the city from Muslim attacks. Guy turned his attention to the
wealthy port of Acre. He amassed an army to besiege the city and
received aid from Philip's newly arrived French army. The combined
armies were not enough to counter Saladin, however, whose forces
besieged the besiegers. In summer 1190, in one of the numerous
outbreaks of disease in the camp, Queen Sibylla and her young
daughters died. Guy, although only king by right of marriage,
endeavoured to retain his crown, although the rightful heir was
Sibylla's half-sister Isabella. After a hastily arranged divorce from
Humphrey IV of Toron, Isabella was married to Conrad of Montferrat,
who claimed the kingship in her name.

During the winter of 1190–91, there were further outbreaks of
dysentery and fever, which claimed the lives of Frederick of Swabia,
Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem, and Theobald V of Blois. When the
sailing season began again in spring 1191, Leopold V of Austria
arrived and took command of what remained of the imperial forces.
Philip of France arrived with his troops from Sicily in May. A
neighboring army under Leo II of Cilician Armenia also arrived.[31]


The Near East, c. 1190, at the inception of the Third Crusade Richard
arrived at Acre on 8 June 1191 and immediately began supervising the
construction of siege weapons to assault the city, which was captured
on 12 July. Richard, Philip, and Leopold quarrelled over the spoils of
the victory. Richard cast down the German standard from the city,
slighting Leopold. In the struggle for the kingship of Jerusalem,
Richard supported Guy, while Philip and Leopold supported Conrad, who
was related to them both. It was decided that Guy would continue to
rule but that Conrad would receive the crown upon his death.
Frustrated with Richard (and in Philip's case, in poor health), Philip
and Leopold took their armies and left the Holy Land in August. Philip
left 7,000 French crusaders and 5,000 silver marks to pay them.[1]

On 18 June 1191, soon after Richard's arrival at Acre, he sent a
messenger to Saladin requesting a face to face meeting. Saladin
refused, saying that it was customary for kings to meet each other
only after a peace treaty had been agreed, and thereafter "it is not
seemly for them to make war upon each other". The two therefore never
met, although they did exchange gifts and Richard had a number of
meetings with Al-Adil, Saladin's brother.[32] Saladin tried to
negotiate with Richard for the release of the captured Muslim soldier
garrison, which included their women and children. On 20 August,
however, Richard thought Saladin had delayed too much and had 2,700 of
the Muslim prisoners decapitated in full view of Saladin's army, which
tried unsuccessfully to rescue them.[33] Saladin responded by killing
all of the Christian prisoners he had captured.

Battle of Arsuf Full article: Battle of Arsuf After the capture of
Acre, Richard decided to march to the city of Jaffa. Control of Jaffa
was necessary before an attack on Jerusalem could be attempted. On 7
September 1191, however, Saladin attacked Richard's army at Arsuf, 30
miles (50 km) north of Jaffa. Saladin attempted to harass Richard's
army into breaking its formation in order to defeat it in detail.
Richard maintained his army's defensive formation, however, until the
Hospitallers broke ranks to charge the right wing of Saladin's forces.
Richard then ordered a general counterattack, which won the battle.
Arsuf was an important victory. The Muslim army was not destroyed,
despite losing 7,000[34] men, but it did rout; this was considered
shameful by the Muslims and boosted the morale of the Crusaders. Arsuf
had dented Saladin's reputation as an invincible warrior and proved
Richard's courage as soldier and his skill as a commander. Richard was
able to take, defend, and hold Jaffa, a strategically crucial move
toward securing Jerusalem. By depriving Saladin of the coast, Richard
seriously threatened his hold on Jerusalem.[35]

Advances on Jerusalem, regicide, and negotiations Following his
victory at Arsuf, Richard took Jaffa and established his new
headquarters there. He offered to begin negotiations with Saladin, who
sent his brother, Al-Adil (known as 'Saphadin' to the Franks), to meet
with Richard. Negotiations, which included an attempt to marry
Richard's sister Joan to Al-Adil, failed, and Richard marched to
Ascalon, which had been recently demolished by Saladin.[36]

In November 1191 the Crusader army advanced inland towards Jerusalem.
On 12 December Saladin was forced by pressure from his emirs to
disband the greater part of his army. Learning this, Richard pushed
his army forward, spending Christmas at Latrun. The army then marched
to Beit Nuba, only 12 miles from Jerusalem. Muslim morale in Jerusalem
was so low that the arrival of the Crusaders would probably have
caused the city to fall quickly. Appallingly bad weather, cold with
heavy rain and hailstorms, combined with fear that if the Crusader
army besieged Jerusalem, it might be trapped by a relieving force, led
to the decision to retreat back to the coast.[37]

Richard called on Conrad to join him on campaign, but he refused,
citing Richard's alliance with King Guy. He too had been negotiating
with Saladin as a defence against any attempt by Richard to wrest Tyre
from him for Guy. However, in April, Richard was forced to accept
Conrad as king of Jerusalem after an election by the nobles of the
kingdom. Guy had received no votes at all; Richard sold him Cyprus as
compensation. Before he could be crowned, Conrad was stabbed to death
by two Hashshashin in the streets of Tyre. Eight days later, Richard's
nephew Henry II of Champagne married Queen Isabella, who was pregnant
with Conrad's child. It was strongly suspected that the king's killers
had acted on instructions from Richard.

During the winter months, Richard's men occupied and refortified
Ascalon, whose fortifications had earlier been razed by Saladin. The
spring of 1192 saw continued negotiations and further skirmishing
between the opposing forces. On 22 May the strategically important
fortified town of Darum on the frontiers of Egypt fell to the
crusaders, following five days of fierce fighting.[38] The Crusader
army made another advance on Jerusalem, and in June it came within
sight of the city before being forced to retreat again, this time
because of dissention amongst its leaders. In particular, Richard and
the majority of the army council wanted to force Saladin to relinquish
Jerusalem by attacking the basis of his power through an invasion of
Egypt. The leader of the French contingent, the Duke of Burgundy,
however, was adamant that a direct attack on Jerusalem should be made.
This split the Crusader army into two factions, and neither was strong
enough to achieve its objective. Richard stated that he would
accompany any attack on Jerusalem but only as a simple soldier; he
refused to lead the army. Without a united command the army had little
choice but to retreat back to the coast.[39]

Saladin's attempt to recapture Jaffa and the end of the Crusade

Saladin and Richard assured the rights and protection of pilgrim and
caravan routes that allowed travel to distant lands. Full article:
Battle of Jaffa (1192) In July 1192, Saladin's army suddenly attacked
and captured Jaffa with thousands of men, but Saladin lost control of
his army due to their anger for the massacre at Acre. It is believed
that Saladin even told the Crusaders to shield themselves in the
Citadel until he had regained control of his army.

Richard had intended to return to England when he heard the news that
Saladin and his army had captured Jaffa. Richard and a small force of
little more than 2,000 men went to Jaffa by sea in a surprise attack.
Richard's forces stormed Jaffa from their ships and the Ayyubids, who
had been unprepared for a naval attack, were driven from the city.
Richard freed those of the Crusader garrison who had been made
prisoner, and these troops helped to reinforce the numbers of his
army. Saladin's army still had numerical superiority, however, and
they counter-attacked. Saladin intended a stealthy surprise attack at
dawn, but his forces were discovered; he proceeded with his attack,
but his men were lightly armoured and lost 700 men killed due to the
missiles of the large numbers of Crusader crossbowmen.[40] The battle
to retake Jaffa ended in complete failure for Saladin, who was forced
to retreat. This battle greatly strengthened the position of the
coastal Crusader states.[41]

On 2 September 1192, following his defeat at Jaffa, Saladin was forced
to finalize a treaty with Richard providing that Jerusalem would
remain under Muslim control, while allowing unarmed Christian pilgrims
and traders to visit the city. Ascalon was a contentious issue as it
threatened communication between Saladin's dominions in Egypt and
Syria; it was eventually agreed that Ascalon, with its defences
demolished, be returned to Saladin's control. Richard departed the
Holy Land on 9 October 1192.

Aftermath

The Levant in 1200, after the Third and German (1197) Crusades Neither
side was entirely satisfied with the results of the war. Though
Richard's victories had deprived the Muslims of important coastal
territories and re-established a viable Frankish state in Palestine,
many Christians in the Latin West felt disappointed that he had
elected not to pursue the recapture of Jerusalem.[42] Likewise, many
in the Islamic world felt disturbed that Saladin had failed to drive
the Christians out of Syria and Palestine. Trade flourished, however,
throughout the Middle East and in port cities along the Mediterranean
coastline.[43]

Saladin's scholar and biographer Baha al-Din recounted Saladin's
distress at the successes of the Crusaders:

'I fear to make peace, not knowing what may become of me. Our enemy
'will grow strong, now that they have retained these lands. They will
'come forth to recover the rest of their lands and you will see every
'one of them ensconced on his hill-top,' meaning in his castle,
''having announced, "I shall stay put" and the Muslims will be
'ruined.' These were his words and it came about as he said.[44]

Richard was arrested and imprisoned in December 1192 by Leopold V,
Duke of Austria, who suspected Richard of murdering Leopold's cousin
Conrad of Montferrat. Leopold had also been offended by Richard
casting down his standard from the walls of Acre. He was later
transferred to the custody of Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, and it
took a ransom of one hundred and fifty thousand marks to obtain his
release. Richard returned to England in 1194 and died of a crossbow
bolt wound in 1199 at the age of 41.

In 1193, Saladin died of yellow fever. His heirs would quarrel over
the succession and ultimately fragment his conquests.

Henry of Champagne was killed in an accidental fall in 1197. Queen
Isabella then married for a fourth time, to Amalric of Lusignan, who
had succeeded his brother Guy, positioned as King of Cyprus. After
their deaths in 1205, her eldest daughter Maria of Montferrat (born
after her father's murder) succeeded to the throne of Jerusalem.

Richard's decision not to attack Jerusalem would lead to the call for
a Fourth Crusade six years after the third ended in 1192. However,
Richard's victories facilitated the survival of a wealthy Crusader
kingdom centred on Acre. Historian Thomas F. Madden summarises the
achievements of the Third Crusade:

...the Third Crusade was by almost any measure a highly successful
...expedition. Most of Saladin's victories in the wake of Hattin were
...wiped away. The Crusader kingdom was healed of its divisions,
...restored to its coastal cities, and secured in a peace with its
...greatest enemy. Although he had failed to reclaim Jerusalem,
...Richard had put the Christians of the Levant back on their feet
...again.[45]

Accounts of events surrounding the Third Crusade were written by the
anonymous authors of the Itinerarium Peregrinorum et Gesta Regis
Ricardi (a.k.a. the Itinerarium Regis Ricardi), the Old French
Continuation of William of Tyre (parts of which are attributed to
Ernoul), and by Ambroise, Roger of Howden, Ralph of Diceto, and
Giraldus Cambrensis.

See also Crusade of 1197 Fourth Crusade References References ^ Jump
up to: a b c Frank McLynn. "Richard and John: Kings at War." Page 219.
^ Tyerman, p.436 ^ Jump up to: a b c Loud 2010, p. 19. ^ Hunyadi,
Zsolt (2011), A keresztes háborúk világa, p. 41. ^ McLynn, p. 219:
breakdown includes 2,000 Outremer levies, 1,000 Templars and
Hospitallers, 2,000 Genoese and Pisans, and 2,000 Danes, Norwegians,
and Turcopoles. ^ Hosler 2018, p. 72-73. ^ Hosler 2018, p. 54. ^
Hosler 2018, p. 34. ^ Pryor, John H. (2015). "A Medieval Siege of
Troy: The Fight to the Death at Acre, 1189–1191 or The Tears of Ṣalāḥ
al-Dīn". In Halfond, Gregory I. (ed.). The Medieval Way of War:
Studies in Medieval Military History in Honor of Bernard S. Bachrach.
Farnham: Ashgate. Page 108. ^ Tyerman p.422: "After desperate fighting
involving the Emperor himself, the Turks outside the city were
defeated [by the Imperial and Hungarian army], apparently against
numerical odds." ^ Loud 2010, p. 104: the Seljuks lost 5,000+ men per
their own bodycount estimates on May 7, 1190, soon before the Battle
of Iconium. ^ Riley-Smith, Jonathan (2009). What were the Crusades?
(Fourth ed.). Ignatius Press. p. 15. ^ Lyons, Malcolm Cameron and D.
E. P. Jackson, Saladin: The Politics of the Holy War, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1982), 264. ^ Hans E. Mayer, The Crusades.
Oxford University Press, 1965 (trans. John Gillingham, 1972), p. 139.
^ Frank McLynn, "Richard and John: Kings at War," 2007, page 174. ^
Loud 2010, p. 45. ^ Tyerman p.418 ^ Jump up to: a b J. Phillips, The
Fourth Crusade and the Sack of Constantinople, 66 ^ A. Konstam,
Historical Atlas of The Crusades, 124 ^ Angold 2016, p. 297-298. ^
Loud 2010, p. 102–103. ^ Loud 2010, p. 104. ^ Loud 2010, pp. 109–111.
^ Loud 2010, p. 181. ^ Loud 2010, pp. 97–111. ^ L.
Villegas-Aristizábal, "Revisión de las crónicas de Ralph de Diceto y
de la Gesta regis Ricardi sobre la participación de la flota angevina
durante la Tercera Cruzada en Portugal", Studia Historica- Historia
Medieval 27 (2009), pp. 153–70. ^ Wolff and Hazard, p. 57 ^ Wolff and
Hazard, p. 58 ^ Wolff and Hazard, p. 61 ^ Wolff and Hazard, pp. 63–64
^ M. Chahin (1987). The Kingdom of Armenia: A History. Curzon Press.
p. 245. ISBN 0-7007-1452-9. ^ Gillingham, John (1999). Richard I. Yale
University Press. pp. 20–21. ISBN 0300094043. ^ Marshall Hodgson, The
Venture of Islam Conscience and History in a World Civilization Vol 2.
The University of Chicago, 1958, pg. 267. ^ 7,000 dead according to
the Itinerarium trans. 2001 Book IV Ch. XIX, p. 185 ^ Oman, pp. 311–18
^ Nicolle, p. 83 ^ Gillingham, pp. 198–200. ^ Gillingham, p. 208 ^
Gillingham, pp. 209–12 ^ Oman, p.319 ^ Runciman, pp. 71–72 ^ Procter,
George (1854). History of the crusades: their rise, progress, and
results. R. Griffin and Co. pp. 112–16. ^ Crompton, Samuel Willard
(2003). The Third Crusade: Richard the Lionhearted vs. Saladin. Great
battles through the ages. Infobase Publishing. p. 64. ISBN
0-7910-7437-4. ^ al-Din, Baha; D.S. Richards (2002). The Rare and
Excellent History of Saladin. Crusade Texts in Translation. 7 (1 ed.).
Burlington, VT; Hampshire, England: Ashgate. p. 232. ISBN
0-7546-3381-0. ^ Madden, Thomas (2006). The New Concise History of the
Crusades. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. p. 95.
ISBN 978-0-7425-3823-8. Bibliography Asbridge, T., The Crusades: The
War for the Holy Land (London, 2010). Baha al-Din Ibn Shaddad, The
Rare and Excellent History of Saladin, trans. D.S. Richards
(Aldershot, 2001). Angold, Michael (2016). "The Fall of Jerusalem
(1187) as viewed from Byzantium". In Boas, Adrian (ed.). The Crusader
World. Routledge. De Expugnatione Terrae Sanctae per Saladinum,
translated by James A. Brundage, in The Crusades: A Documentary
Survey. Marquette University Press, 1962. La Continuation de Guillaume
de Tyr (1184–1192), edited by Margaret Ruth Morgan. L'Académie des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 1982. Ambroise, The History of the
Holy War, translated by Marianne Ailes. Boydell Press, 2003. Chronicle
of the Third Crusade, a Translation of Itinerarium Peregrinorum et
Gesta Regis Ricardi, translated by Helen J. Nicholson. Ashgate, 1997.
Edbury, P.W., The Conquest of Jerusalem and the Third Crusade: Sources
in Translation. Ashgate, 1996. Edde, A-M., Saladin, trans. J.M. Todd
(London, 2011). Gabrieli, F., (ed.) Arab Historians of the Crusades,
English translation 1969, ISBN 0-520-05224-2 Gillingham, John (1978).
Richard the Lionheart. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN
0-297-77453-0. Harris, Jonathan (2014), Byzantium and the Crusades,
Bloomsbury, 2nd ed. ISBN 978-1-78093-767-0. Hosler, John (2018). The
Siege of Acre, 1189-1191: Saladin, Richard the Lionheart, and the
Battle that Decided the Third Crusade. Yale University Press. ISBN
978-0-30021-550-2. Hurlock, Kathryn (2013), Britain, Ireland and the
Crusades, c.1000-1300, Basingstoke: Palgrave Loud, G. A. (2010). The
Crusade of Frederick Barbarossa: The History of the Expedition of the
Emperor Frederick and Related Texts. Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate
Publishing. ISBN 9780754665755. Lyons, M.C. & D.E.P Jackson, Saladin:
Politics of the Holy War (Cambridge, 2001). Nicolle, David (2005). The
Third Crusade 1191: Richard the Lionheart and the Battle for
Jerusalem. Osprey Campaign. 161. Oxford: Osprey. ISBN 1-84176-868-5.
Oman, C.W.C., (1924) A History of the Art of War in the Middle Ages
Vol. I, 378–1278 AD. London: Greenhill Books; Mechanicsburg,
Pennsylvania: Stackpole Books, reprinted in 1998. Steven Runciman, A
History of the Crusades, vol. II: The Kingdom of Jerusalem, and vol.
III: The Kingdom of Acre. Cambridge University Press, 1952–55.
Villegas-Aristizabal, L., Revisión de las crónicas de Ralph de Diceto
y de la Gesta regis Ricardi sobre la participación de la flota
angevina durante la Tercera Cruzada en Portugal, Studia Historica-
Historia Medieval 27 (2009), pp. 153–70. Villegas-Aristizabal, Lucas,
2007, The Norman and Anglo-Norman Participation in the Iberian
Reconquista, c. 1018–1248, Phd Thesis, Nottingham: University of
Nottingham. Wolff, R.L & Hazard, H W (Editor), 1969, A History of the
Crusades, Volume II: The later Crusades, 1189-1311, University of
Wisconsin Press, ISBN 978-0299048440 External links Wikimedia Commons
has media related to Third Crusade. Ancient History Encyclopedia - The
Third Crusade A History of the Third Crusade Third Crusade, BBC Radio
4 discussion with Jonathan Riley-Smith, Carole Hillenbrand and Tariq
Ali (In Our Time, Nov. 29, 2001)

